Consumer Arbitration Minimum Standards | JAMS Mediation, Arbitration, ADR Services
Skip to main content
Skip to main content Submit a Case
JAMS Access Login
JAMS Pathways
MENU
Neutrals
Rules & Clauses
Arbitration Rules & Procedures
Comprehensive Rules
Streamlined Rules
Discovery Protocols
Appeal Procedures
Class Action Procedures
Consumer Minimum Standards
Mass Arbitration Procedures
Artificial Intelligence
AI Disputes Clause and Rules
AI Disputes Protective Order
Smart Contracts
Smart Contract Clause & Rules
International Rules
International Mediation Rules
International Arbitration Rules
International Arbitration Guidelines
Construction Arbitration
Construction Arbitration Rules
Expedited Construction Arbitration Rules
Surety Adjudication Rules
Labor and Employment Arbitration Rules
Employment Arbitration Rules
Labor Arbitration Rules
Employment Minimum Standards
Download Rules / Forms
Download Rules / Forms
Rules Archive
ADR Sample Clauses
Clause Workbook (U.S. Domestic)
Clause Workbook (International)
Artificial Intelligence Disputes Clause
Construction Clauses
Employment Clauses
Locations
ADR Services
Alternative Dispute Resolution
What do we do?
Educational Programs & CLEs
In-House Counsel ADR Strategies
Forms & Resources
FAQs
Mediation
Mediation Services
What is Commercial Mediation?
What Happens in Mediation?
Mediators Ethics Guidelines
Arbitration
Arbitration (North America)
Arbitration (International)
Labor Arbitration
Additional Services
Appellate Services
California Court Reference Services
Class Action & Mass Tort
Neutral Analysis
JAMS Endispute
JAMS Pathways
JAMS Next
Practice Areas & Industries
All Practice Areas & Industries
Appellate
Bankruptcy
Class Action
Construction
Cybersecurity & Privacy
Disaster Relief
Employment
Energy
Engineering & Construction
Entertainment
Estate/Probate/Trust
Family Law
Federal
Financial Markets
Health Care
Higher Education & Title IX
Insurance
Intellectual Property
International & Cross-Border
Labor
Life Sciences
Mass Tort
Personal Injury & Tort
Real Estate & Real Property
Smart Contracts & Blockchain
Sports
Technology
News & Insights
Articles & Insights
JAMS ADR Insights
JAMS International Insights
Podcasts
News & Press Releases
JAMS News & Press Releases
Events & Webinars
JAMS Events & Webinars
About
Who we are
Our Values
Senior Management
Impact
JAMS Foundation
Social Responsibility
Life at JAMS
Employee Benefits
Apply Online
Search site
Consumer Arbitration Minimum Standards
Print Page Download page as PDF
Consumer Arbitration Minimum Standards
JAMS Arbitrators and Arbitration Services
JAMS Policy on Consumer Arbitrations Pursuant to Pre-Dispute Clauses Minimum Standards of Procedural Fairness
The JAMS Consumer Minimum Standards of Procedural Fairness have been updated, effective May 1, 2024. Standard No. 5 of the CMS now provides: “The consumer's access to arbitration must not be precluded by the location of the arbitration.”
Effective May 1, 2024
Download JAMS Consumer Arbitration Minimum Standards in PDF Format
Minimum Standards for Arbitration Procedures
JAMS will administer arbitrations pursuant to mandatory pre-dispute arbitration clauses between companies and consumers 1 only if the contract arbitration clause and specified applicable rules comply with the following minimum standards of fairness:
The arbitration agreement must be reciprocally binding on all parties such that (a) if a consumer is required to arbitrate his or her claims or all claims of a certain type, the company is so bound; and (b) no party shall be precluded from seeking remedies in small claims court for disputes or claims within the scope of its jurisdiction.
The consumer must be given notice of the arbitration clause. Its existence, terms, conditions and implications must be clear.
Remedies that would otherwise be available to the consumer under applicable federal, state or local laws must remain available under the arbitration clause, unless the consumer retains the right to pursue the unavailable remedies in court.
The arbitrator(s) must be neutral, and the consumer must have a reasonable opportunity to participate in the process of choosing the arbitrator(s).
The consumer's access to arbitration must not be precluded by the location of the arbitration.
The clause or procedures must not discourage the use of counsel.
With respect to the cost of the arbitration, when a consumer initiates arbitration against the company, the only fee required to be paid by the consumer is $250, which is approximately equivalent to current court filing fees. All other costs must be borne by the company, including any remaining JAMS Filing Fee, Case Management Fee and all professional fees for the arbitrator's services. When the company is the claiming party initiating an arbitration against the consumer, the company will be required to pay all costs associated with the arbitration.
In California, the arbitration provision may not require the consumer to pay the fees and costs incurred by the opposing party if the consumer does not prevail.
The arbitration provision must allow for the discovery or exchange of non-privileged information relevant to the dispute.
An Arbitrator's Award will consist of a written statement stating the disposition of each claim. The award will also provide a concise written statement of the essential findings and conclusions on which the award is based.
1 These standards are applicable where a company systematically places an arbitration clause in its agreements with individual consumers and there is minimal, if any, negotiation between the parties as to the procedures or other terms of the arbitration clause. A consumer is defined as an individual who seeks or acquires any goods or services, primarily for personal, family or household purposes, including the credit transactions associated with such purchases, or personal banking transactions. These standards do not apply to the use of arbitration in resolving disputes arising from commercial transactions between a lender and commercial borrowers or a company and commercial customers; other financial services such as investment transactions or real estate transactions; or to matters involving underinsured motorists. Nor do they apply if the agreement to arbitrate was negotiated by the individual consumer and the company.
(c) Copyright 2024 JAMS. All rights reserved.
Arbitration Resources
What Is Arbitration? Rules, Clauses, and Procedures Discovery Protocols Arbitrators Ethics Guidelines Arbitration Forms Virtual Arbitration FAQs
Need to submit a case with JAMS?
Case Submission Portal
Looking for a mediator or arbitrator?
Search Neutrals
Stay updated on the latest in mediation, arbitration and dispute resolution.
Email address
Subscribe
Neutrals
Insights
Rules & Clauses
Locations
Capabilities
Careers
About
Disclaimer
Contact Us
Consumer Case Information
Neutrality
Cookie Consent
Privacy Center
Terms of Service
Accessibility and Accommodation Requests
Disclaimer
This website is not a solicitation for business. All content on the JAMS website is intended to provide general information about JAMS and an opportunity for interested persons to contact JAMS. The content of this website is not offered as legal advice or legal opinion and it should not be relied upon for any specific situation.  JAMS neutrals are not engaged in the practice of law and no attorney client relationship is intended.  This website is for informational purposes only and does not constitute a complete description of JAMS services. While JAMS endeavors to keep the information updated and correct, JAMS makes no representations or warranties of any kind, express or implied, about the completeness, accuracy, or reliability of the information contained in this website.
SEE MORE
© 2026 JAMS. All rights reserved.
Need Assistance?
Get help selecting a neutral or submitting a case.
Contact Us
Scroll to top