                                                                     Anshuman Rudra <anshuman.rudra@gmail.com>



SAVKAT SOLAR - TIME TO TURN ON YOUR SYSTEM!
1 message

Sheri Barracliff <sbarracliff@savkat.com>                                                   Fri, May 12, 2023 at 12:55 PM
To: "anshuman.rudra@gmail.com" <anshuman.rudra@gmail.com>

    Great news! The utility has given you permission to operate your system.



    To turn on the system, please flip the switch by pulling the lever on the AC Disconnect box which
    is outside your house.



    You can access the monitoring on mysunpower.com. Below is a link with instructions on how to
    download the mobile app with a video walkthrough of what you will see in the monitoring system.



                                 My SunPower Monitoring Walkthrough

                                      Connecting Monitoring to WiFi

    During the set up process, you'll need to enter the 4 digits from your monitoring device, they are:



    3398


    If you experience any issues during monitoring set up and connectivity, please call:



    SunPower Technical Support at 1-800-786-7693



    Please reply to my email to confirm you got set up with the monitoring app and turned on the
    system.



    Thank you for choosing SAVKAT as your solar provider!



 Kind Regards,



 Sheri Barracliff

 Project Concierge

 (203)-567-4563
www.savkat.com




CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE: This e-mail transmission may contain information that is proprietary, confidential or
legally privileged. The information is intended for the individual or entity named in the e-mail address. If you are not
the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any use, disclosure, copying, distribution, continued possession,
or reliance upon the contents of this e-mail is strictly prohibited. If you have received this e-mail transmission in
error, please notify the sender so that we can arrange for proper delivery, and then delete all copies of this message.
Thank you.
